# MLGCL: Multi-Level Graph Contrastive Learning (Neurocomputing 2024)

**Source**: (2024 Neurocomputing) Multi-Level Graph Contrastive Learning.pdf


---
## Page 1

Multi-Level Graph Contrastive Learning
Pengpeng Shao1, Tong Liu1, Dawei Zhang1, Jianhua Tao1,2,3, Feihu Che1, Guohua
Yang1
1National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China;
2School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China;
3CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
Abstract
Graph representation learning has attracted a surge of interest recently, whose target
at learning discriminant embedding for each node in the graph. Most of these repre-
sentation methods focus on supervised learning and heavily depend on label informa-
tion. However, annotating graphs are expensive to obtain in the real world, especially
in specialized domains (i.e. biology), as it needs the annotator to have the domain
knowledge to label the graph. To approach this problem, self-supervised learning pro-
vides a feasible solution for graph representation learning. In this paper, we propose
a Multi-Level Graph Contrastive Learning (MLGCL) framework for learning robust
representation of graph data by contrasting space views of graphs. Speciﬁcally, we
introduce a novel contrastive view - topological and feature space views. The original
graph is ﬁrst-order approximation structure and contains uncertainty or error, while the
kNN graph generated by encoding features preserves high-order proximity. Thus kNN
graph generated by encoding features not only provide a complementary view, but is
more suitable to GNN encoder to extract discriminant representation. Furthermore,
we develop a multi-level contrastive mode to preserve the local similarity and seman-
tic similarity of graph-structured data simultaneously. Extensive experiments indicate
MLGCL achieves promising results compared with the existing state-of-the-art graph
representation learning methods on seven datasets.
Keywords: Graph Representation Learning, Self-Supervised Learning, Contrastive
Learning
Preprint submitted to Neurocomputing
July 7, 2021
arXiv:2107.02639v1  [cs.LG]  6 Jul 2021


---
## Page 2

1. Introduction
Graphs including millions of nodes and edges are an effective tool to conduct vari-
ous data analyses for researchers. While implementing the task of data analysis in the
original graph is quite intractable due to the inherent high complexity. Currently, the
mainstream methods to this obstacle are graph representation learning, which aims to
projects the nodes into low-dimensional space and represent them as low dimensional
continuous vectors. Traditional graphs representation learning algorithms include ran-
dom walk-based algorithms (i.e. DeepWalk [1], Line [2]) and Matrix factorization-
based algorithms (i.e. DMF [3] and M-NMF [4]). With the advent of Graph Neural
Networks (GNN), graph representation learning receive more increasingly attention
and has been widely applied to various data analytic tasks, such as link prediction,
community detection, and anomaly detection on biological networks.
Most graph representation learning methods using GNN focus on supervised fash-
ion and heavily depend on label information to learn the representation of graph-
structured data. Unlike common modalities such as image and text, graphs are usually
used to represent the relation between knowledge or concepts in specialized domains,
graph-structured data need the annotator to have the domain knowledge to label the
graph. Thus, the annotating graphs are expensive and limited to obtain in many sci-
entiﬁc domains. Therefore, learning the representation of graph-structure data in an
unsupervised or self-supervised fashion becomes a more increasingly important task.
Indeed, many reconstruction-based unsupervised algorithms have been proposed
for graph representation learning over past years, they either reconstruct the features
of graph nodes or the topology structure of the graph, such as DNGR [5], SDNE [6],
NetRA [7], and TEA [8]. These methods aim to learn a low-dimensional representation
that preserves the locality property and/or global reconstruction capability in autoen-
coder or variant autoencoder.
Inspired by the success of contrastive learning in image understanding (i.e. Sim-
CLR [9], BYOL [10], and MoCo [11]) and natural language processing (i.e. GPT [12]),
contrastive learning coupled with GNNs graph representation learning becomes an
open task. The core idea of contrastive learning is designing a pretext task to train an
2


---
## Page 3

Edge Perturbation
Attribute Masking
Local-Global Structural Views Feature-Topology Space Views
Topology Graph
Input Graph
Global Graph
KNN Graph
Local Graph
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
Input Graph
Input Graph
Input Graph
: Delete Edge
: Add Edge
: Mask Node Feature
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2
: Copy
 : Graph Diffusion
1
2
: Copy
 : Encoder + KNN
2
: Attribute Masking
1
1
2
1
: Edge Perturbation
Edge Perturbation
Attribute Masking
Local-Global Structural Views Feature-Topology Space Views
Topology Graph
Input Graph
Global Graph
KNN Graph
Local Graph
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
Input Graph
Input Graph
Input Graph
: Delete Edge
: Add Edge
: Mask Node Feature
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2
: Copy
 : Graph Diffusion
1
2
: Copy
 : Encoder + KNN
2
: Attribute Masking
1
1
2
1
: Edge Perturbation
Figure 1: Four data augmentations for graphs. The last one is the the proposed data augmentation scheme in
this work
encoder for representation learning, therein, the design of the pretext task includes the
design of data augmentation schemes and object function. Thus DGI [13] shufﬂes node
features to augment the training examples, then combines the contrastive objective that
maximizing the Mutual information (MI) between the node and global semantic repre-
sentations to training the feature extractor GNNs. Motivated by multi-view contrastive
learning for visual representation learning, MVGRL [14] learns node and graph rep-
resentations by maximizing MI between node representations of one view and graph
representation of another view. Subgraph [15] learns node representations through
MI loss deﬁned based on central nodes and their sampled subgraphs representation.
GCA [16] argues that the data augmentation schemes should preserve intrinsic struc-
tures and attributes of graphs and proposes an adaptive augmentation scheme that can
extract the important connective structures of the original graph to the augmentation
data based on node centrality measures. In addition, GCA [16] also introduces node-
level contrastive loss to maximize the agreement between node embeddings in two
views. GraphCL [17] provides multiple graph augmentations including Edge perturba-
tion, Attribute masking, and maximizes the MI between the node and global semantic
representations to learn node representation. Figure 1 presents four data augmentations
for graphs, and Table 1 gives a comparison of related works in contrastive mode and
data augmentation scheme.
3


---
## Page 4

Node Representation 
GNN
GNN
Encoder
Shared
Topology Graph
KNN Graph
Augmentations
kNN
)
,
(
1
1
1
X
A
f
h =
)
,
(
2
2
2
X
A
f
h =
MLP
MLP
Pool
Node Representation 
Graph Representation 
)
( 1
1
h
g
z

=
)
(
2
2
h
g
z

=
)
( 1
1
h
R
c =
graph
node
Shared
Pool
)
(
2
2
h
R
c =
Pool
)
(
2
2
h
R
c =
MLP
MLP
)
( 1
1
c
g
s

=
)
( 2
2
c
g
s

=
Shared
Node Representation 
GNN
GNN
Encoder
Shared
Topology Graph
KNN Graph
Augmentations
kNN
)
,
(
1
1
1
X
A
f
h =
)
,
(
2
2
2
X
A
f
h =
MLP
MLP
Pool
Node Representation 
Graph Representation 
)
( 1
1
h
g
z

=
)
(
2
2
h
g
z

=
)
( 1
1
h
R
c =
graph
node
Shared
Pool
)
(
2
2
h
R
c =
MLP
MLP
)
( 1
1
c
g
s

=
)
( 2
2
c
g
s

=
Shared
Figure 2: The framework of multi-level graph contrastive learning.
Most GNNs models assume that similar nodes are likely to be connected and be-
long to the same class in the observed graph. However, the observed graph from
the real-world contains uncertainty or error, and the nodes are connected in differ-
ent ways, such as feature similarity, relationship, so that the nodes of different classes
may have links. This is inconsistent with the idea of GNN, so that causes unsatis-
factory results, a typical example is GNNs perform well on assortative graphs, but do
not perform well on disassortative graphs. Therefore, constructing a kNN graph by
feature similarity or dropping the links between the nodes in different classes are fea-
sible methods. GEN [18] constructs multi-view underlying community structure and
attain the estimated optimal graph in Bayesian inference framework. PTDNet [19]
prunes task-irrelevant edges by penalizing the number of edges in the sparsiﬁed graph
with parameterized networks. Inspired by this, we develop a Multi-Level Graph Con-
trastive Learning (MLGCL) framework for learning robust representation of graph data
by contrasting space views of graphs - topological and feature space views. As shown
in Figure 2, we apply kNN algorithm to encoding features, so that generate the kNN
graph in the feature space. kNN graph not only provides a complementary view but
is more suitable to GNN, thus combining both of them in a contrastive learning way
can signiﬁcantly improve the robustness and adaptability of GNNs encoder. Further-
more, we also introduce a multi-level contrastive mode to preserve the local similarity
and semantic similarity of graph-structured data simultaneously. Through the proposed
4


---
## Page 5

Table 1: Comparison with related works in contrast mode and data augmentation scheme
Methods
Contrastive mode
Views
Data Augmentation
DGI
Node vs Graph
1
-
GMI
Node vs Node
1
-
MVGRL
Node vs Graph
2
Graph Diffusion
SUBG-CON
Node vs Graph
1
-
GraphCL
Node vs Graph
2
Node Dropping,
Edge Perturbation,
Attribute Masking,
Extract Subgraph
GCC
Graph vs Graph
2
Extract Subgraph
GCA
Node vs Node
2
Adaptive Edge Perturbation,
Adaptive Attribute Masking
Ours
Node vs Node,
Graph vs Graph
2
kNN Graph Construction
novel contrastive views and multi-level contrastive mode, our model MLGCL achieves
promising results on seven datasets.
2. Related Work
2.1. Graph Representation Learning
Graph representation learning methods can be broadly classiﬁed into three cat-
egories: random walk-based algorithms, matrix factorization-based algorithms, and
deep learning-based algorithms. Here, we introduce these three types of methods only
from the perspective of unsupervised learning. Random walk-based algorithms, such
as DeepWalk [1], Line [2], Node2vec [20], which is inspired by word2vec algorithm
and regards node sequence obtained by random walk as language sentence to analyze.
In essence, they also inherit the idea of contrastive learning, that nodes occurring in the
same sequence are viewed as the positive sample, and they should have similar rep-
resentation. Matrix factorization-based algorithms [21, 22] learns the representation
5


---
## Page 6

of each node through reconstructing the adjacency matrix or/and ﬁxed-order proxim-
ities of the graph. It is worth noting that [23] proves that random walk-based algo-
rithms can be uniﬁed into the matrix factorization framework with closed forms. Early
deep learning-based unsupervised algorithms [5, 6] use autoencoder with DNN to learn
graph representation. With the advent of GCN, more graph representation learning
methods employ powerful GCN as the encoder. For instance, DGI [13], GraphCL [17],
MVGRL [14], and Subgraph [15], they all adopt GCN [24] as encoder and focus on
maximizing MI between global graph-level and local node-level embeddings. Different
from them, GMI [25] uses a discriminator to directly measure MI between input and
high-level embeddings of a graph neural encoder without data augmentation. GCA [16]
deﬁnes a contrastive objective at the node level that distinguishes the embeddings of
the same node in these two different views from other node embeddings. Further-
more, GCC [26] proposes a self-supervised GCN pre-training framework, in which it
leverages contrastive learning to train GCN [24] on multiple graph datasets to learn
the intrinsic and transferable structural representations. GPT-GNN [27] also designs a
self-supervised attributed graph generation task including attribute generation and edge
generation to pre-train GNN.
2.2. Contrastive Learning
The core idea of the standard contrastive learning approach is designing a pretext
task to train a learner model for representation learning. To achieve this pretext task, we
ﬁrst employ prior domain knowledge to automatically generate the training examples
that act as pseudo-labels or supervised data of the prediction, then design a contrastive
loss function to train the learner model. Therefore, Contrastive Learning consists of
three main components: Data augmentation schemes, generate the supervised data.
The leaner model, which is used to extract data features, commonly consists of an en-
coder and a head projector. Loss function, is designed to utilize the augmentation ex-
amples to train the learner. Furthermore, how to develop an effective loss function and
data augmentation schemes for contrastive learning also is an open problem involving
the quality of the leaner. In the following part, we brieﬂy introduce the design of data
augmentation and loss function in different domains.
6


---
## Page 7

Data Augmentation :
The methods of data augmentation vary in the research
domain. In image understanding, the common data augmentation schemes are image
rotation, cropping, ﬁltering, add noises, and Mixup, etc. Which can generate two dif-
ferent views of the input that supervise each other. Different from the single-frame
image, video is composed of a series of continuous images, which have the charac-
teristics of temporal consistency that adjacent images have similar semantic content.
Thus [28] borrows and extends this idea, and employs continuous three images as the
contrastive examples, [29] uses temporal cycle consistency for self-supervision.
Compared with image and video, graph-structured data have the following priors
and properties. First, vertex and edge missing do not alter the graph semantics. Second,
the missing partial attributes of each node does not alter the robustness of the graph se-
mantics, Third, the subgraph structure of the graph can hint the full semantics. Fourth,
correlated views of the same graph possess semantic consistency, such as local and
global views of a graph structure. Thus DGI [13], GraphCL [17], MVGRL [14], and
Subgraph [15] propose corresponding data augmentations for graphs: node dropping,
edge perturbation, attribute masking, extract subgraph, and construct multi-structural
views. As illustrated above method that correlated views of the same graph possess
semantic consistency, thus MVGRL [14] proposes a data augmentation from structure
view. In this work, we propose our data augmentation schemes from another view -
space view: feature space and topology space views. In these two space, these corre-
lated graphs have similar and intrinsic characteristics, thus the shared learner extracts
the similar representation to conduct contrastive learning to learn robust representation
for graph data.
Loss Function :
This part summarizes several loss functions that contain con-
trastive ideas, which are described as follows:
Deepwalk and node2vec extend the idea of skip-gram and propose to optimize
the probability loss function that maximizing the probability of nearest vertices of the
given a vertex to learn graph representation, the nearest vertices Ns(u) can be obtained
by random walk, breadth ﬁrst search or depth ﬁrst search algorithm. As illustrated
above, these methods also inherit the idea of contrastive learning that nodes occurring
in the same sequence are viewed as the positive sample, and they should have similar
7


---
## Page 8

representation.
Lprobability =
X
u∈V
logPr(Ns(u)|f(u))
(1)
Self-supervised learning models can be classiﬁed as generative, contrastive and
generative-contrastive (adversarial). Generative adversarial Network is a typical method
of generative-contrastive, the discriminator provides the given true example (supervi-
sory information) to the generator (learner) to boost the capability of the generator.
Ladversarial = min
G max
D
Ex∼Pdata(x)[logD(x)] + Ez∼Pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))] (2)
Where z is noise, D(·) and G(·) correspond to discriminator and generator, respec-
tively,
Triplet loss plays a very important role in deep metric learning : Given an anchor
x, a positive xp of the same class as the anchor, a negative xf of a different class, the
triplet loss targets at achieving this case that the distance of x and xf greater than the
distance of x and xp plus margin m.
Ltriplet = max(d(x, xp) −d(x, xf) + m)
(3)
Currently, standard contrastive loss can be divided into two categories, one is max-
imizing the similarity of the corresponding nodes between two views, the other is max-
imizing the MI between node and graph representation.
Lnode(zi, zj) = log
exp((za
i )T zb
i /τ)
PK
j=1,j̸=i exp((za
i )T zb
i /τ) + exp((za
i )T za
j /τ) + exp((za
i )T zb
j/τ)
(4)
Lmutual =
1
2K
K
X
i=1
[MI(za
i , sb) + MI(zb
i , sa)]
(5)
Where, z denotes node representation, s is graph representation, a and b denotes two
views, respectively. the Lcontrastive contains a pair of positive examples (za
i , zb
i ) and
K-1 pair of negative examples (za
i , za
j ) and (za
i , zb
j). We randomly sample a minibatch
of K examples, we can derive 2K data points by conducting one data augmentation.
Given a positive pair, we treat the other 2(K −1) examples as negative examples. τ is
a temperature hyperparameter that is used to smooth the results.
8


---
## Page 9

3. Prelininaries
Prior to going further, we ﬁrst introduce the preliminary concepts used in the fol-
lowing sections. Let G(A, X) denotes a undirected graph, where V = {v1, v2, · · · , vN}
is node set, N = |V | is the number of graph node. E denotes edge set. The adjacent
matrix A ∈RN×N represents the topological structure of graph G, its elements sug-
gest the strength of connection between vi and vj. X ∈RN×F suggests the matrix
consisting of the content features associated with each node. Contrastive learning aims
to learn an encoder model f(·) which can learn a robust representation for each node vi
that is insensitive to the perturbation caused by data augmentations τ. Here, we denote
the node representation learned by the encoder model as Z = f(A, X). The learned
representation then be applied to the downstream tasks, such as node classiﬁcation.
4. Multi-Level Graph Contrastive Learning Framework
To learn a robust graph representation in a self-supervised fashion, we propose a
Multi-Level Graph Contrastive Learning (MLGCL) framework as Figure 2. To be spe-
ciﬁc, we ﬁrst sample a pair of graph augmentation functions τ1 and τ2 from augmen-
tation pool τ, which is applied to the input graph to generate the augmented graph of
two views. Then we use a pair of shared GNN-based encoder to extract node represen-
tation, and further employ the pooling layer to extract the graph representation. After
that, we utilize a shared MLP layer to project the nodes representation from both views
into the space where the node-level contrastive loss is computed. Similarly, we also
project the graphs representation from both views into the space where the graph-level
contrastive loss is computed. Finally, we learn the parameters of the encoder through
optimize the proposed multi-level loss function. Note that, the augmentation graph of
the second view is generated by the encoding feature, thus τ2 includes an encoder and
kNN function.
Thus, MLGCL is mainly composed of the following components:
• Graph Data Augmentation : Its goal is to exert perturbation on the input graph
to generate two correlated graphs of the same graph. In this work, we extract
augmentation graph structure from space view to conduct contrastive learning.
9


---
## Page 10

• GNN Encoder: GNN-based Encoder f(·) is used to learn node representation z1,
z2 for two augmented graphs. In the inference phrase, we only use GNN encoder
to learn node representation for downstream tasks.
• MLP : The head projection MLP layer g(·) maps the representation to the space
in which the contrastive loss is computed.
• Graph Pooling : The graph pooling layer (i.e. readout) R(·) is employed to learn
graph representation.
• Loss Function : The multi-level loss function is proposed to preserve the low-
level “local” and high-level “global” agreement, simultaneously.
4.1. Data Augmentation for Graphs
In visual representation learning, contrasting two views of the image allows en-
coders to learn their common and discriminant representations. Which inspires us to
seeks to two different and correlated views of the graph. In this work, we extract
two correlated augmentation graph structure from space view to conduct contrastive
learning. Given the graph structure of topology space G(A, X), we ﬁrst employ GNN
encoder to extract the encoding features Z of topology graph, then apply k-nearset
neighbour to Z to construct kNN graph with community structure Gf(Af, X), where
Af is the adjacency matrix of kNN graph. Therein, constructing the feature map us-
ing kNN can described as two steps: First, calculating the similarity matrix S based
on N encoding features Z. Second, choosing top k similar node pairs for each node
to set edges and ﬁnally get the adjacency matrix of kNN graph Af. In fact, there are
many schemes to obtain similarity matrix S, such as distance-based Similarity Calcula-
tion Method (i.e. Euclidean distance, Mahalanobis distance), Cosine-based similarity
calculation (i.e. Cosine similarity, Pearson correlation), and Kernel-based similarity
calculation (i.e. Gaussian kernel, Laplace kernel). We list three popular ones here, in
which xi and xj are feature vectors of nodes i and j:
1) Mahalanobis Distance:
Sij =
q
(xi −xj)T M(xi −xj)
(6)
10


---
## Page 11

Where M is a positive semideﬁnite matrix, which plays the role of the inverse covari-
ance matrix
2) Cosine Similarity : It uses the cosine value of the angle between two vectors to
measure the similarity.
Sij = xi · xj
|xi||xj|
(7)
3) Gaussian Kernel : The similarity is calculated by the Eq. 8 where σ is the kernel
width of Gaussian kernel.
Sij = e−
∥xi−xj ∥2
2σ2
(8)
Here, we uniformly choose the Cosine Similarity to obtain the similarity matrix S.
4.2. Encoder
Given topology graph G(A, X) and kNN graph Gf(Af, X), we employ a two-
layer GCN as our encoder model to obtain their latent node representations matrix,
repectively. The encoder f(·) can be formally represented as
Zl+1 = f(A, X) = σ( eAZlW l)
(9)
Here, eA = bD−1/2 bA bD−1/2 is the symmetrically normalized adjacency matrix, bA =
A + In is the adjacency matrix with self-loops, In ∈Rn×n is the identity matrix,
and bD = Σj bAij is degree matrix. Zl contains the embedding (row-wise) of the graph
vertices in the l-th layer, and Z0 = X is the input for GCN in the ﬁrst layer. W l is the
parameters matrix, and σ(·) is nonlinearity activation function (i.e., ReLU, Sigmoid).
For node representation Za, Zb of each view, we utilize a graph pooling layer P(·)
: RN×d 7−→Rd (i.e. readout function) to derive their graph representation:
c = P(H) = σ( 1
N
N
X
i=1
hi)
(10)
In addition, in order to conduct corresponding node representation and graph represen-
tation contrast of two views, we employ MLP layer gφ(·) and gϕ(·) : RN×d 7−→RN×d
to project node and graph representation into the space where the contrastive loss is
computed, respectively.
11


---
## Page 12

4.3. Multi-Level Loss Function
The core idea of contrastive learning is designing an appropriate pretext task to
train an encoder model to extract rich node and graph representation. Here, we em-
ploy multi-level loss function to update the parameters of the encoder. Multi-level loss
function, namely, the joint contrastive loss function from local to global, consists of
two parts: the contrast of low-level node representation between two views, and the
contrast of high-level graph representation between two views.
Given positive pair (zi, zj), the node-level contrastive loss function is deﬁned as,
Lnode(za
i , zb
i ) = log
exp((za
i )T zb
i /τ)
PK
j=1,j̸=i exp((za
i )T zb
i /τ) + exp((za
i )T za
j /τ) + exp((za
i )T zb
j/τ)
(11)
Due to the two views is symmetric, the loss of the other view is deﬁned as Lnode(zb
i , za
i ).
Thus we maximize the agreement of the nodes between two views through optimizing
the followings,
Lnode = Lnode(za
i , zb
i ) + Lnode(zb
i , za
i )
(12)
Similarly, given positive examples (sa, sb) and negative examples (sa, ˜sa), (sa, ˜sb),
the graph representation contrast between two views is deﬁned as,
Lgraph(sa, sb) = log
exp((sa)T sb/τ)
exp((sa)T sb/τ) + exp((sa)T ˜sa/τ) + exp((sa)T ˜sb/τ)
(13)
Here, to generate negative graph samples, we randomly shufﬂe the features to derive
negative adjacent matrix ˜A and ˜Af, and then obtain negative samples (sa, ˜sa), (sa, ˜sb).
The loss for another view is deﬁned as Lgraph(sb, sa). Thus, the overall graph repre-
sentation contrast, formally given by,
Lgraph = Lgraph(sa, sb) + Lgraph(sb, sa)
(14)
Finally, through combining node-level contrastive loss with graph-level contrastive
loss, the multi-level loss of our model to be maximized can be presented as,
L = Lnode + λLgraph
(15)
where λ is tuning parameters to balance the importance of Lnode and Lgraph, respec-
tively.
12


---
## Page 13

Dataset
Nodes
edges
Features
Labels
Domain
Cora
2,708
5,429
1,433
7
Citation Networks
Citeseer
3,312
4,732
3,703
6
Citation Networks
PubMed
19,717
44,338
500
3
Citation Networks
WikiCS
11,701
216,123
300
10
Hyperlinks Networks
CoauthorCS
18,333
81,894
6,805
15
Coauthor Networks
Cornell
183
280
1,703
5
Web Pages Networks
Actor
7,600
26,752
932
5
Cooccurence Networks
Table 2: Graph Datasets
5. Experiment Result
5.1. Datasets
To evaluate the effectiveness of the representation learned by the proposed model,
we conduct extensive experiments on multiple datasets from different domains. Here,
We use seven datasets Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, WikiCS, CoauthorCS, Cornell, and Ac-
tor to demonstrate the scalability of our methods. Therein, Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed
are three citation networks in which the vertexes are academic papers and the edges
represent the citation relationship between papers. WikiCS is a graph dataset of ar-
ticles about computer science, where the nodes refer to articles, edges are hyperlinks
between articles. CoauthorCS is a coauthor network in which the two nodes that have
a connection relationship represent two articles with the same author. Cornell is a web
pages network where nodes are web pages, edges are links between web pages. Actor
is a cooccurence network in which the nodes refer to actors, each edge represents the
two actors that occur on the same Wikipedia page. The detailed information of all these
datasets is provided in Table 5.1.
5.2. Evaluation Protocol
In this work, we conduct node classiﬁcation experiments and employ the experi-
mental protocol of the previous state-of-the-art approaches to evaluate the performance
of the proposed method. Speciﬁcally, we use the node representation learned by our
13


---
## Page 14

model to train the logistic regression classiﬁer, and then give the classiﬁcation results
on the test nodes. Followed DGI, we adopt the mean classiﬁcation accuracy with stan-
dard deviation to assess the performance for all these datasets.
5.3. Baselines
To assess the proposed method, we employ the following two categories meth-
ods as our baselines: (1) unsupervised learning methods, including the naive method
that use a logistic regression classiﬁer on raw input node features, classical methods
DeepWalk [1] and the DeepWalk-F that concatenates the learned embeddings with in-
put node features, unsupervised version of GraphSage [30] (abbreviated as Unsup-
GraphSAGE), self-supervised methods DGI [13], GMI [25], Sub-graph [15], MV-
GRL [14], GraphCL [17], and GCA [16]. (2) supervised learning methods MLP [31],
Label Propagation (LP) [32], PLANETOID [33], CHEBYSHEV [34], GCN [24], GAT [31],
and supervised version of GraphSage. Notably, for all baselines, we report their per-
formance based on their ofﬁcial implementations or choose optimal hyper-parameters
carefully after reproducing the code for different baselines in this paper to ensure the
fairness of comparison experiments.
5.4. Implementation Details
The proposed model is implemented on Pytorch [35] framework and geometric
deep learning extension library, and it is optimized by Adam algorithm [36]. The
parameters in the proposed model are initialized by Xavier initialization. To have fair
comparisons, we follow MVGRL and set the number of GCN layers and the number of
epochs and to 1 and 2,000, respectively. Here, we set the size of the latent dimension
of both node and graph representations to 512. To choose the best classiﬁer model for
the test, we also utilize early stopping with a patience of 20.
5.5. Comparison with Baseline Algorithms
Table 3 and Table 4 present the classiﬁcation results of the proposed model and
baseline models on seven graph datasets, and we have the following observations and
analyses. First, on the whole, the proposed model achieves considerable performance
14


---
## Page 15

compared with baseline models. For instance, our method outperforms the state-of-the-
art self-supervised methods GCA and GMI 4% and 1.4% on Cora dataset, respectively.
On Cornell dataset, our method outperforms MVGRL and GCA 4.7% and 13.4%, re-
spectively. Second, although without the guidance of the label information, our method
obtains superior performance on the seven datasets compared with supervised learning
methods including GCN, GAT, and GraphSage. This veriﬁes that the pseudo-label in-
formation generated by data augmentation exerts a powerful effect on self-supervised
representation learning. Third, GRACE proposes node-level contrastive mode, while
GCA which is an improved version of GRACE designs an adaptive data augmentation
based on GRACE to learn representations that are insensitive to perturbation on unim-
portant nodes and edges. However, we can obtain that GCA does not obtain explicit
improvement than GRACE from the results presented in Table 3 and Table 4. We argue
that the main reasons are as follows. (1) That the importance of an edge is determined
by its centrality degree is not universally accurate, such as some nodes have only one
edge. (2) Even though removing the important edge of the node, the performance of
the model may not much worse than that of GCA, because removing edges uniformly
on the whole graph does not affect the semantics of the node. Fourth, there are the
following two differences between GCA and our method: (1) GCA designs a topology
level augmentation scheme based on edge centrality measures and an attribute level
augmentation scheme by adding more noise on node features, respectively. While our
method employs the topological graph of topological space and the community graph
of feature space as contrastive examples of two views. (2) Our method develops the
node-level contrastive mode and proposes a multi-level contrastive mode from local
and global views. These two designs also enable our method to outperform GCA on
all datasets. Fifth, MVGRL is the closest work to our method, MVGRL designs the
augmentation examples from local and global views, while the proposed method de-
velops contrastive mode from local and global views. From the overall experimental
results, our method has a similar classiﬁcation performance to MVGRL. Finally, the
considerable performance of our model veriﬁes that our proposed data augmentation
scheme and multi-level contrastive mode is capable of helping boost graph representa-
tion quality.
15


---
## Page 16

Table 3: Summary of performance on node classiﬁcation in terms of accuracy in percentage with standard
deviation. Available data for each method during the training phase is presented in the second column, where
A, X, Y correspond to the adjacency matrix, node features, and node labels, respectively. OOM indicates
running Out-Of-Memory on a 16GB GPU. For clarity, the champion performance is highlighted in boldface,
the runner-up performance is underlined.
Algorithm
Input data
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
Raw features
X
47.9 ± 0.4
49.3 ± 0.2
69.1 ± 0.2
DeepWalk
A
67.2
43.2
63.0
DeepWalk-F
A, X
70.7 ± 0.6
51.4 ± 0.5
74.3 ± 0.9
Unsup-GraphSAGE
A, X
75.2 ± 1.5
59.4 ± 0.9
70.1 ± 1.4
DGI
A, X
82.3 ± 0.6
71.8 ± 0.7
76.8 ± 0.6
GMI
A, X
83.0 ± 0.3
73.0 ± 0.3
79.9 ± 0.2
SUBG-CON
A, X
83.5 ± 0.5
73.2 ± 0.2
81.0 ± 0.1
MVGCL
A, X
85.6 ± 0.5
73.3 ± 0.5
80.1 ± 0.7
GraphCL-Edge
A, X
81.4 ± 0.4
72.5 ± 0.5
77.4 ± 0.4
GraphCL-Mask
A, X
81.5 ± 0.5
72.7 ± 0.5
77.8 ± 0.6
GRACE
A, X
80.0 ± 0.4
71.7 ± 0.6
79.5 ± 1.1
GCA
A, X
80.5 ± 0.5
71.3 ± 0.4
78.6 ± 0.6
MLGCL
A, X
84.4 ± 0.4
73.5 ± 0.5
81.3 ± 0.5
MLP
X, Y
55.1
46.5
71.4
LP
A, Y
68.0
45.3
63.0
PLANETOID
X, Y
75.7
64.7
77.2
CHEBYSHEV
A, X, Y
81.2
69.8
74.4
GCN
A, X, Y
81.5
70.3
79.0
GAT
A, X, Y
83.0 ± 0.7
72.5 ± 0.7
79.0 ± 0.3
GraphSAGE
A, X, Y
79.2 ± 1.5
71.2 ± 0.5
73.1 ± 1.4
16


---
## Page 17

Table 4: Summary of performance on node classiﬁcation in terms of accuracy in percentage with standard
deviation. Available data for each method during the training phase is presented in the second column, where
A, X and Y correspond to the adjacency matrix, node features and node labels, respectively. For clarity, the
champion performance is highlighted in boldface, the runner-up performance is underlined.
Algorithm
Input data
WikiCS
CoauthorCS
Cornell
Actor
Raw features
X
71.98 ± 0.00
90.37 ± 0.07
57.60 ± 3.2
25.62 ± 0.5
DeepWalk
A
74.35 ± 0.06
84.61 ± 0.22
56.72 ± 4.6
27.81 ± 0.8
DeepWalk-F
A, X
77.21 ± 0.03
87.70 ± 0.04
58.26 ± 0.2
48.56 ± 0.3
MVGRL
A, X
77.52 ± 0.08
92.11 ± 0.12
61.19 ± 3.0
30.52 ± 0.7
DGI
A, X
75.35 ± 0.14
92.15 ± 0.63
55.68 ± 4.8
26.80 ± 0.8
GMI
A, X
74.85± 0.08
OOM
61.35 ± 6.0
29.51 ± 0.8
GRACE
A, X
78.19 ± 0.01
92.93 ± 0.01
53.78 ± 7.2
27.06 ± 1.1
GCA
A, X
78.35 ± 0.01
93.10 ± 0.01
52.47 ± 5.4
26.38 ± 0.4
MLGCL
A
78.63 ± 0.05
92.86 ± 0.01
61.89 ± 6.2
30.74 ± 0.7
Chebyshev
A, X, Y
75.63 ± 0.60
91.52 ± 0.00
55.81 ± 4.6
29.64 ± 0.5
GCN
A, X, Y
77.19 ± 0.12
93.03 ± 0.35
56.78 ± 4.5
30.28 ± 0.6
GAT
A, X, Y
77.65 ± 0.11
92.31 ± 0.24
59.21 ± 2.3
26.30 ± 1.3
17


---
## Page 18

Table 5: Performance comparison of variants of the proposed model
Algorithm
Available data
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
MLGCL-edge
A, X
68.9 ± 0.3
60.1 ± 0.3
64.3 ± 0.4
MLGCL-mask
A, X
70.9 ± 0.4
61.3 ± 0.4
65.4 ± 0.4
MLGCL-L&G
A, X
80.8 ± 0.5
70.1 ± 0.5
75.6 ± 0.7
MLGCL
A, X
84.4 ± 0.4
73.5 ± 0.5
80.5 ± 0.5
MLGCL-node vs node
A, X
80.9
70.7
77.5
MLGCL-graph vs graph
A, X
80.4
71.8
78.2
5.6. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct two ablation studies to study the impact of each compo-
nent of the proposed model. To study the impact of our data augmentation, We investi-
gated another three data augmentation schemes including Edge Perturbation, Attribute
Masking, and Graph Diffusion. Similarly, we drop the component of multi-level con-
trastive mode to study its impact. The results are presented in Table 5.
5.6.1. Impact of Data Augmentation
As illustrated above, we investigated another three data augmentation schemes,
Edge Perturbation, Attribute Masking, and Graph Diffusion. Thus in Table 5, MLGCL-
edge denotes the model that replacing the proposed data augmentation scheme with
Edge Perturbation augmentation. Similarly, MLGCL-mask and MLGCL-L&G refer to
the model that replaces the proposed data augmentation scheme with Attribute Masking
and Graph Diffusion augmentations, respectively. The results of the upper part of
Table 5 show that the proposed augmentation scheme improves model performance
on Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed datasets, and our proposed model gains 15.3% absolute
improvement compared to MLGCL-edge. The results verify the effectiveness of our
data augmentation schemes on feature space.
18


---
## Page 19

5.6.2. Impact of Contrastive Mode
We considered three contrastive modes including, node va node, graph vs graph,
and these two modes are the components of the proposed contrastive mode. Thus
MLGCL-node vs node suggests the model that replacs the proposed multi-level con-
trastive mode with node vs node contrastive mode, MLGCL-graph vs graph denotes the
model that replacing the proposed multi-level contrastive mode with graph vs graph
contrastive mode. The results of the lower part in Table 5 suggest that the proposed
multi-level contrastive mode is superior to its component mode, further indicate that lo-
cal and global contrastive mode can collaborate to achieve better performance. Please
kindly note that the above results in Table 5 only verify that the proposed method is
effective and achieve the best performance compared to the variants of the proposed
method under our settings, it can not suggests the proposed data augmentation scheme
or contrastive mode is best universally.
6. Conclusion
This work introduces a novel contrastive learning framework for graph represen-
tation learning. First, due to original graph is ﬁrst-order approximation structure and
contains uncertainty or error, while kNN graph with community structure that gener-
ated by encoding features preserves high-order proximity, thus kNN graph not only
provide a complementary graph structure from space view but also is more suitable to
GNN encoder. Furthermore, we develop a multi-level contrastive mode to preserve the
local similarity and semantic similarity of graph-structured data simultaneously. Exten-
sive experiments indicate the proposed model achieves considerable results compared
with the existing graph representation learning methods on seven datasets.
References
References
[1] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, S. Skiena, Deepwalk: Online learning of social represen-
tations, Proceedings of International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining.
19


---
## Page 20

[2] J. Tang, M. Qu, M. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Yan, Q. Mei, Line: Large-scale informa-
tion network embedding., in: Proceedings of International Conference on World
Wide Web, 2015.
[3] D. Zhang, J. Yin, X. Zhu, C. Zhang, Collective classiﬁcation via discriminative
matrix factorization on sparsely labeled networks, Proceedings of International
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management.
[4] X. Wang, P. Cui, J. Wang, J. Pei, W. Zhu, S. Yang, Community preserving net-
work embedding, in: Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2017.
[5] S. Cao, W. Lu, Q. Xu, Deep neural networks for learning graph representations,
in: Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2016.
[6] D. Wang, P. Cui, W. Zhu, Structural deep network embedding, in: Proceedings of
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2016.
[7] W. Yu, C. Zheng, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, D. Song, B. Zong, H. Chen,
W. Wang, Learning deep network representations with adversarially regularized
autoencoders, Proceedings of International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining.
[8] Y. Yang, H. Chen, J. Shao, Triplet enhanced autoencoder: Model-free discrimi-
native network embedding, in: Proceedings of International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2019.
[9] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, G. E. Hinton, A simple framework for con-
trastive learning of visual representations, Proceedings of ArXiv.
[10] J.-B. Grill, F. Strub, F. Altch´e, C. Tallec, P. H. Richemond, E. Buchatskaya,
C. Doersch, B. A. Pires, Z. D. Guo, M. G. Azar, et al., Bootstrap your own latent:
A new approach to self-supervised learning, Proceedings of arXiv.
[11] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, R. Girshick, Momentum contrast for unsupervised
visual representation learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
20


---
## Page 21

[12] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, Improving language understanding by generative
pre-training, 2018.
[13] P. Veliˇckovi´c, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Li`o, Y. Bengio, R. D. Hjelm, Deep
graph infomax, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2019.
[14] K. Hassani, A. H. Khasahmadi, Contrastive multi-view representation learning
on graphs, Proceedings of arXiv.
[15] Y. Jiao, Y. Xiong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Sub-graph contrast for
scalable self-supervised graph representation learning, Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Data Mining (2020) 222–231.
[16] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, L. Wang, Graph contrastive learning with
adaptive augmentation, in: Proceedings of the Web Conference, 2021, pp. 2069—
-2080.
[17] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, Graph contrastive learn-
ing with augmentations, Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems.
[18] R. Wang, S. Mou, X. Wang, W. Xiao, Q. Ju, C. Shi, X. Xie, Graph structure
estimation neural networks, in: Proceedings of the Web Conference, 2021, pp.
342–353.
[19] D. Luo, W. Cheng, W. Yu, B. Zong, J. Ni, H. Chen, X. Zhang, Learning to drop:
Robust graph neural network via topological denoising, in: Proceedings of Inter-
national Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2021, pp. 779–787.
[20] A. Grover, J. Leskovec, node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks, in:
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, 2016, pp. 855–864.
[21] C. Yang, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, M. Sun, E. Y. Chang, Network representation learning
with rich text information.
21


---
## Page 22

[22] M. Ou, P. Cui, J. Pei, Z. Zhang, W. Zhu, Asymmetric transitivity preserving graph
embedding, in: Proceedings of international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, 2016.
[23] J. Qiu, Y. Dong, H. Ma, J. Li, K. Wang, J. Tang, Network embedding as matrix
factorization: Unifying deepwalk, line, pte, and node2vec, in: Proceedings of the
Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2018,
pp. 459–467.
[24] T. N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional
networks, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2017.
[25] Z. Peng, W. Huang, M. Luo, Q. Zheng, Y. Rong, T. Xu, J. Huang, Graph represen-
tation learning via graphical mutual information maximization, in: Proceedings
of The Web Conference, 2020, pp. 259–270.
[26] J. Qiu, Q. Chen, Y. Dong, J. Zhang, H. Yang, M. Ding, K. Wang, J. Tang, Gcc:
Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network pre-training, in: Proceedings
of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1150—-1160.
[27] Z. Hu, Y. Dong, K. Wang, K.-W. Chang, Y. Sun, Gpt-gnn: Generative pre-training
of graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2020.
[28] X. Wang, A. Gupta, Unsupervised learning of visual representations using videos,
in: Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp.
2794–2802.
[29] D. Dwibedi, Y. Aytar, J. Tompson, P. Sermanet, A. Zisserman, Temporal cycle-
consistency learning, in: Proceedings of 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019, pp. 1801–1810.
22


---
## Page 23

[30] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, J. Leskovec, Inductive representation learning on large
graphs, in: Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 1025—-1035.
[31] P. Veliˇckovi´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li`o, Y. Bengio, Graph at-
tention networks, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, 2018.
[32] X. Zhu, Z. Ghahramani, J. Lafferty, Semi-supervised learning using gaussian
ﬁelds and harmonic functions, in: Proceedings of the Twentieth International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, 2003, pp. 912—-
919.
[33] Z. Yang, W. W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdinov, Revisiting semi-supervised learning
with graph embeddings, in: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016, pp. 40—-48.
[34] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, P. Vandergheynst, Convolutional neural networks on
graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering, in: Proceedings of the 30th Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 3844—-
3852.
[35] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. Devito, Z. Lin, A. Des-
maison, L. Antiga, A. Lerer, Automatic differentiation in pytorch, in: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[36] J. C. Duchi, E. Hazan, Y. Singer, Adaptive subgradient methods for online learn-
ing and stochastic optimization, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
23
